---
title: "One char at a time"
layout: post
permalink: /OneChar/
tags: [ tok3n ]
---

[Last time](/StaticString/) I had a brief explanation of the library I want to design. I want to create parser combinators using expression templates, where all information is in the parser types themselves, with no data members.

Writing this library has been a hugely enjoyable experience. I'm sure I'll find flaws and issues to be addressed, after writing these articles. So let's start simple and work up to the more complex cases. How simple can we get? How about a type that parses exactly 1 character.

<!--more-->

<br>

## Exactly 1 character

I want a type with a function that takes a string as an input, and returns whether the input starts with a given char. Because I want all parser data available as part of the type itself, the char to match will be a template parameter, and the parsing function will be static.

```cpp
template <char c>
struct OneChar
{
    static constexpr bool parse(std::string_view input)
    {
        return not input.empty() && input.front() == c;
    }
};
```

This does exactly what it says on the tin. The following code will print "Success" to `cout`;

```cpp
OneChar<'a'> parser;
if (parser.parse("abc"))
    std::cout << "Success";
else
    std::cout << "Failure";
```

<br>

## Exactly 1 character part 2 - from a set

Instead of what I wrote above, I found it much more useful to actually take a `StaticString` as a non-type template parameter to `OneChar`, instead of just a single char. I wrote the [first article](/StaticString/) for a reason eh? (<- to show I'm Canadian)

This way, we can match one character from a set of characters. By "set" I actually do mean a sorted and unique list of characters. A binary search is less efficient than a linear search in this case, because of the small list size (this is anecdotal for my code; please benchmark your own code). However, even with that being true, keeping the list unique will help. There's no need to check the same character twice, and there's no additional run time cost to ensure this.

```cpp
template <StaticString str>
requires (is_sorted_and_uniqued(str))
struct OneChar
{
    static constexpr bool parse(std::string_view input)
    {
        return not input.empty() && str.contains(input.front());
    }
};
```

This looks basically the same as before. But let's add a few things to our `StaticString` so it compiles.

<br>

## Adding a few things to `StaticString`

These functions aren't strictly necessary. They could obviously be implemented manually at the call site, but I plan on reusing them in other places. I think `view()` and `contains()` both make sense as member functions, since they fit a large variety of purposes. On the other hand, functions like `is_sorted_and_uniqued()` make more sense as free functions. There's an infinite set of "querying" functions we could write, and we don't want to make our class infinitely large. As they say, ["Classes are made of Velcro"](https://youtu.be/rpCc-cfYa3k?t=35m15s).

```cpp
template <std::size_t N>
struct StaticString
{
    // ...
    constexpr std::string_view view() const
    {
        return std::string_view(data.data(), N);
    }

    constexpr bool contains(char c) const
    {
        return view().find(c) != std::string_view::npos;
    }
    // ...
}

template <std::size_t N>
constexpr bool is_sorted_and_uniqued(const StaticString<N>& str)
{
	if constexpr (N <= 1)
		return true;
	else
	{
		for (std::size_t i = 0; i < N - 1; ++i)
			if (str.data[i] >= str.data[i + 1])
				return false;
		return true;
	}
}
```

I would like to use [`std::views::slide`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/ranges/slide_view/) for `is_sorted_and_uniqued()`, but that's in C++23 and I want to support C++20. Maybe this will be motivation to remove `std::ranges` from this class entirely, but that'll be a topic for another time.

I also think it's important to add a constructor and a deduction guide from `char` to a `StaticString<1>`, so that this works `OneChar<'a'>` instead of requiring `OneChar<"a">`. It's a minor QOL detail, but I prefer it. Did you catch the usage of `OneChar<'a'>` above?

```cpp
template <std::size_t N>
struct StaticString
{
    // ...
    constexpr StaticString(char c) noexcept requires (N == 1)
	{
		data[0] = c;
	}
    // ...
}

StaticString(char) -> StaticString<1>;
```

<br>

## `OneChar` in practice, feat. compile time testing

For now, this is what using a `OneChar` will look like.

```cpp
OneChar<"ab"> parser;
if (parser.parse("abc"))
    std::cout << "Success - abc";
if (parser.parse("bca"))
    std::cout << "Success - bca";
if (not parser.parse("cab"))
    std::cout << "Failure - cab";
```

All of these lines will be printed. Even better, because we made the `parse()` function `constexpr`, then we can check the correctness at compile time! Like so:

```cpp
OneChar<"ab"> parser;
static_assert(parser.parse("abc"));
static_assert(parser.parse("bca"));
static_assert(not parser.parse("cab"));
```

I'm a huge fan of compile time testing. If my code compiles, then it's correct. How amazing is that?!

Also notice that `parser` is a run time variable, and yet we can use it inside of a `static_assert`. This is because `parse()` is a static function, so it's irrelevant whether the object itself is `constexpr` or not. In terms of the semantics, it's less confusing to instead write `decltype(parser)::parse()`, but it's not as nice to read. And it's exactly equivalent either way.

<br>

## A problem lurking

Back in December, I was working on [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com/), and I encountered an MSVC compiler bug that made my `OneChar` parser give different results at compile time and run time. But I'll leave that story for next time.

If you have been, thanks for reading!
